# Foreword

This document is written as a complementary material to the year old research document entitled *Artifacts of the Flower of Life*<!-- cite author="Marko Manninen" title="Artifacts of the Flower of Life" date="2014" location="" type="website" href="http://artifacts.flowerofliferesearch.com/" -->. The former research concentrated more to artifacts and historical occurrences of the symbol. The current document will concentrate more on the creation and the meaning of the Flower of Life symbol (later called by the acronym FOL). The document is meant to shed light, not only to geometrical but also to archetypical principles as background concepts behind the FOL. This is done by using comparative mythology and etymological studies.

The first part of the document will bring the reader through the traditional geometrical introspection to the formation of the FOL. This method is a contemplative and at the same time a systematic way to understand basic definitions of a point, a line, and a plane. These all are fundamental concepts that are needed to deeply understand the Flower of Life motif. Examination of these concepts can reveal the meaning and the function that people tried to express with the FOL motif. Even better, contemplation of the basics of geometry can help us to understand how all things in life evolve from one point, how many things are reducible or groupable to a single instance and how everything is connected to each other no matter how different and distant in time and space they first seem to be.

Philosophical background of the definitions of sameness and difference, oneness and multitude or, chaos and order, is not a new topic. A deep realization of the identity<!-- cite author="wikipedia.org" title="Identity (philosophy)" date="" location="" type="website" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_(philosophy)" --> greatly helps to grab a brilliant net of concepts that are imprinted within the FOL symbol. A strong botanical connection from the ground up to the final formation of the symbol suggests that the modern name "Flower of Life" is not too far from the intended meaning of the ancients. At least, we can see how it is plausibly defensible as a modern name. 

The second part of the document contains new discoveries of artifacts with new observations and symbol associations that will be presented together with a classification proposal of several variations of the FOL in [Appendix 1](appendix1.md). Especially the ivory whorl from Cyprus, 1600 - 1100 BC ([Item 6](newitems.md#figx.y.x)), deserves a mention as a one of the oldest object having the FOL symbol attached on it. Naming and symbolic cognates of the FOL are discussed more in Part 2.

For the dating of the FOL, my conjecture based on cultural, historical, archeological and etymological evidence is that the first occurrence of the FOL (class 1 and p) must be timed earlier from my previous cautious estimation of 2000 BC, at least to 2500 BC. To support this dating, the Pre-Indus occurrence of the FOL pattern and certain Hittite symbols are presented and discussed in this document.

Some notes about phraseology in this document must be stated in the beginning. First of all, ideas presented here have roots in my own thinking until otherwise stated either in the text or in footnotes. But that doesn't mean ideas are solely mine because many people in many fields have made similar research, thinking, and contemplation. In addition, I have made a lot of reflection with hundreds of books, documents, articles, and websites so that the result, this complementary document, is somewhat a mixture of the whole process. At the end of the document, there is a collection of resources that I have found useful for investigation.

I have deliberately decided not to use words like "certainly", "evidently", "must have been", "supposedly", "perhaps", or "maybe" either to convince or to indicate speculative uncertainty of statements. It would just add too much unnecessary repetition to the document. In most cases sentences could be prefixed with "possibly" adverb anyway. I have reserved affirmative words only to certain cases where I specifically want to emphasize certainness or uncertainness of the truth value of the expression. Every statement should be taken as a limited expression of the viewpoint of the one sole investigator, thus always open for deeper analysis, corrections, and critics. It would be much better if the reader thinks independently by freely weighing the value of the presented ideas.

The third thing to remember is that when people refer to "commonly accepted", "well known" or "supported by most" they tend to forget relativity of such statements. This kind of imperative or selective phraseology is tempting, sometimes hard to avoid and it actually can be an important aspect of the presentation. But without specifying a group with details of individuals or giving a source for such a list, phraseology like this doesn't really give much value to the reader. If we don't have specific people and their works to refer to, how do we get into contact with them, how would we be able to know about their background and the starting point of their interpretation? How would we build our own view then?
<!--
It should be held in mind that topics handled in this document can be very relative and subjective. This is especially true when interpreting historical motifs that have origins far in the past. "Commonly accepted" can refer to a very fuzzy group of people around the world without a statistical justification or just a small team of academics, at its best just in some particular country who have specialized in the subject and have a somewhat similar take on the topic. Of course, this raises a certain "the chicken or the egg" question: would you believe more to the statements of the specialists or your own examination? On the other hand, one person alone can't get too deep into all topics because of time and resource limits, but one should leave as little room as possible for pure guesses and beliefs based on secondary sources.
-->
By these forewords, I think it is time to plunge into the topic.

{% include 'footnotes.md' %}
